We've got another great episode for you today in our continuing mini-series on
viruses and diseases. But first we want to give a quick shout out to you today.
Sponsor curiosity,
stream a subscription streaming services that offers thousands of documentaries
and non-fiction titles get limited access starting at just 2 99 a month,
including 30 days for free.
If you sign up through the link below and use the code,
biographics more on them in a bit.
Throughout the first half of the 20th century,
the scourge of the Western world was polio every summer.
It seemed it attacked at random sickening thousands across the United States and
Europe. The ones that didn't kill overnight, it often left crippled,
destroy the body's ability to control limbs and confining victims to wheelchairs
and crutches for life.
The west affected were unable to breathe without assistance from mechanical
devices. Worst of all the disease, mostly attacked young children,
making polio a appear worse nightmare since it struck without warning.
And no one had a cure. Polio had an outsized impact on Western society.
20th century, the fight against it causing improvements to medical science,
philanthropy, disability rights,
and the responsibility of government to protect its citizens from deadly
pathogens today, the virus is almost nonexistent in the wild,
a results of a concerted effort to eradicate this pestilence from humanity
once and for all, but the effect it has on a,
our world is likely to never be forgotten.
The polio virus was first observed in 1909,
and it is the pathogen that causes poliomyelitis typically shortened to polio.
The virus primarily survives in the person's digestive system,
especially the intestine. And when it remains there, it's completely harmless.
95% people infected with poliovirus have no symptoms at all in
5% of cases. However,
the disease escapes from the digestive system and infects other parts of the
body, particularly the central nervous system. Once there,
the virus can interfere with the nervous system's ability to control muscles,
such as the one need it to move your legs. Initially,
this is felt to simply muscle weakness,
but it can progress to partial or complete paralysis as nerves are damaged
or destroyed. In many cases, the destruction is irreversible in,
in the most severe cases can cause the loss of the ability to control the
diaphragm,
which is the muscle responsible for ensuring that your lungs function properly.
This disease can cause the death of the victim unless they are put onto
artificial breathing equipment.
Polio has been observed throughout human history. Egyptian paintings,
depict healthy people with withered limbs and children walking with canes
thought to be represe of a polio infection.
It is believed that the Roman emperor Claudias walked with a limp caused by
polio. The Scottish Alta Scott is one of the first people to be confirmed,
to have suffered about of polio as a child,
as the science of disease was better understood at the end of the 17 hundreds
continued study over the disease occurred throughout the 19th century.
And eventually it was Christ's infantile paralysis because of who it affected
and what it did still in all that time, the illness was a small scale problem.
It was endemic. Sure,
but it didn't rise to the level of epidemic such as those caused by small parks
yet ALO fever or chole,
but something changed in the latter half of the 19th century to bring polio out
into the open.
The industrial revolution was in full swing,
causing people to move from rural areas to urban ones.
Cities became overcrowded and poorly managed.
As the explosion in population rapidly exceeded the capacity of existing
infrastructure to handle them. People lived past gather in squali tenements.
Malnutrition was rampant and the sanitation systems,
particularly the sewers were overwhelmed. People infected with polio virus,
shed it in their fecal matter.
The virus can stay active for up to a week after leaving the body in this way,
when human waste is being dumped into the same water sources that drinking water
is being drawn from,
people can become infected with of the virus from drinking contaminated water.
Once a sufficient number of people are infected in this way,
the virus can transmit itself from person to person through coming into contact
with infected saliva,
such as when standing close to a person who's talking to you.
It is believed that in this way,
virtually the entire population of the United States and Western Europe became
infected with polio virus by the, of the 19th century.
And the terrifying epidemics began soon after
In 1916, polio struck the United States with a previously unseen fury.
The epidemic centered on New York city,
which saw 9,000 cases over 2000 of which were fatal Nationwides.
There were over 27,000 afflicted and 6,000 deaths.
The epidemic caused widespread panic in New York as public spaces were shut down
and residents fled the city for the countryside.
Families with polio victims were quarantines and were even publicly identified
in local newspapers by that winter, the disease had subsided,
but it proved to be the start of a pattern.
Every summer polio emerged from its winter summer to plague the populations of
the United States in Western Europe.
Epidemics broke out all over the place with little warning.
Two thirds of those affected were children between the ages of five to nine,
leading it to become America's most feared disease.
In the first half of the 20th century, the disease also affected adults though.
It was less common in 1921.
Franklin D Roosevelt was a rising star in the democratic party.
Having been the party's vice presidential candidate in the 1920 election.
The former assistant secretary of the Navy had returned to New York city after
the Democrats lost the election to Warren G Harding and ran his own law firm
biting his time until a new political opportunity came up.
But while on vacation with his family,
Roosevelt was struck down by no this eventually becoming completely paralyzed
from the waist down at the time, Roosevelt was diagnosed with polio,
but many doctors today argue that his symptoms more closely resemble ion bar
syndrome and autoimmune disease. But for the purposes of this story,
it doesn't really matter.
Roosevelt became personally identified with polio for the rest of his life and
helped lead the fight against the disease into his death. In 1945,
FDR tried many different treatments to try and recover the ability to walk after
his illness. In 1924, he visited a natural spring in warm Springs,
Georgia believing hydrotherapy would help with his disability.
It didn't not really, but in 1927,
he bought a place and turned it into a rehabilitation center of a polio victims
representing the first concentrated effort to combat the effects.
Polio Roosevelt's of course would stage one of the most remarkable political
comebacks in American history being elected governor of New York.
And then in 1932 presidents of the United States,
he took careful measures to ensure that his disability was not widely known to
the public. He gave speeches while wearing heavy braces,
that could be locked into place, allowing him to stand.
He made a rough imitation of walking by juting his hips back and forth lifting
his legs in the process.
And he never allowed himself to be photographed or filmed one in his wheelchair.
Still. He never forgot where he had come from and continued to develop his
rehabilitation center in warm Springs. He turned to his friends,
Baslow Connor to establish the national foundation for infantile paralysis in
1938 to raise money for the foundation,
a Connor established a new approach instead of only targeting wealthy patrons
for large Don, he would ask the general public to donate small amounts.
The campaign particularly invited children to send in 10 cent coins.
The March of dimes campaign was incredibly successful.
The white house received tens of thousands of letters with dimes in them,
many donated from children who wanted their school mates to get well,
which raised millions of dollars in the process. The March of dimes soon became,
came short hands for the name of the foundation itself.
And it is credited with being one of the first crowdfunded charitable giving
campaigns. Roosevelt became so synonymous with the March of dimes,
that after he died in office in 1945,
a new dime was issued the next year with his face on it.
A design that continues to this day,
March of dimes used their donations to fund specialized treatment centers for
polio patients,
helping families pay for the costs of treatments and necessary equipment,
such as iron lungs, which were artificial breathing devices for victims,
whose diaphragms weren't working anymore. By the 1950s,
over 80% of polio victims nationwide were receiving funding from the March of
dimes.
They also poured millions of dollars into research efforts to develop a polio
vaccine, which would the disease once and for all. And look,
if you're enjoying this exploration of the history of polio,
I think you should consider giving today sponsor a look to,
and that's curiosity stream curiosity stream is a subscription streaming service
that offers thousands of documentaries and nonfiction titles from some of the
world's best filmmakers, including exclusive originals. Now,
if you've been enjoying the disease profiles we've done here on by biographics
polio, the black deaths smallpox, just to name a few of them,
then why not check out curiosity streams?
Docu-series the body versus coronavirus.
They actually have an entire section of content debated specifically two viruses
and germs.
So you'll definitely want to dive into that curiosity streams available on loads
of apps. I normally list them all, but look, if you've got a screen,
you can watch it on there. Very likely also it's available worldwide,
getting limited access starting at just 2 99 a month. And for you guys,
the first 30 days are completely free. If you sign up a curiosity,
stream.com/biographics and use the promo code biographics during the
signup process, that it's a great way to support the show,
keeps us making more videos. And I just think it's a really good match.
So let's get back to the video.
Dr. Jonas Sal had worked very hard to get where he was in life.
The son of an immigrant Jewish family from New York city Sal had got it through
his, under a graduate program at CCNY and medical school at NYU,
largely thanks to his own brilliance and hard work. He had faced discrimination,
economic hardship, but became a doctor anyway,
but so did not want to practice medicine, his heart lay with medical research,
the science of how disease affected the human body and how it could be
prevented. In 1947,
soak was running a small search laboratory at the university of Pittsburgh.
When the March of dimes approached him,
they needed help studying the polio virus and offered funding to hire more
researchers and to enlarge his lab with better equipment SAR accepted at the
time polio epidemics were getting worse in the United States in 19 49,
40 2000 cases were reported in the us causing over 2000 death.
The 1952 outbreak was the worst 58,000 confirmed cases of which 3000
died. And almost 22,000 were left in some form of paralysis.
The American public was almost hysterical,
terrified that their children would be next to be afflicted BAS O'Connor.
The head of the March of dimes knew that this had to be stopped in 1951.
Conna meant Sal for the first Saul had an innovative idea for a vaccine and he
wanted the March of dimes to help him with it.
At the time so-called live virus vaccines were medical standard,
a live virus vaccine also called an attenuated vaccine,
takes a virus and changes it so that it is less virulent,
less inoculating the body against the wild virus by introducing it in a safer
form. So the immune system can produce antibodies against it.
This is an effective way to make a vaccine,
but it takes time a long time to perfect Dr.
Albert Sabin working at his lab at the children's hospital in Cincinnati was
leading the effort to make a live vaccine for polio.
He brushed off upon his attempts to speed up his process,
seemingly indifferent to the fact that children were getting sick and dying a
while he was waiting to finish his work. SU on the other hand,
proposed using an inactivated virus vaccine also called a dead virus vaccine.
An inactivated virus vaccine uses a virus that has been killed,
tricking the body into producing antibodies against it.
This could be mass produced much faster than a live virus vaccine.
So could first use this formula while working on an influenza vaccine for the us
army majoring world war II and believed it would work for polio as well,
Sabin and other medical researchers called SOS theory, junk science,
but kind believed in anything that would get a vaccine to the public as soon as
possible. And he agreed to fund SOS research
Saul Toce in Pittsburgh, worked tirelessly.
They achieved a breakthrough in late 1952. When a vaccine there developed,
worked in a test on laboratory animals.
The next step was human trials in early 1953,
SAR tested his vaccine on a group of children and adults,
including his own family and himself. No one got polio.
More human trials were conducted throughout 1953 with similar results.
Now O'Connor and Sal were ready to conduct a large scale human trial funded by
the marcher dimes. The Francis field trial began in 1954, Dr.
Thomas Francis of the university of Michigan Sal's Menza ran the trial with a
staff of over 100, the year long trial,
ultimately involved more than 1.8 million school children across the United
States, the largest human medical experiment in American history.
The world waited for the results with batted breath on April the 12th, 1955,
the nation's press gathered Iraq and auditorium at the university of Michigan to
hear the results of the field trial. The date was particularly significant.
It was the 10th anniversary of the death of president Roosevelt, Sal Francis.
And O'Connor informed the world that their vaccine worked,
that it was safe and so that they would start mass producing it immediately.
The news touched off widespread celebration across the country and the world.
It was the culmination of almost 20 years of work from the March of dimes who
had raised millions of dollars from millions of ordinary Americans.
All in the hope of seeing this disease stopped medicine had the tools.
Now it was time to stop the bug once and for all.
Well,
the effort to inoculate against polio was one of the largest vaccination efforts
in human history. In the United States,
new government regulations and oversight organizations needed to be created to
control the quality of the manufactured vaccine doses to certify them as safe
and to create records of who had been vaccinated,
being vaccinated against polio.
It became a requirements to attend public school,
but few parents needed to be coerced into getting their children vaccinated.
They CLAT for the chance to their children from the credit disease,
a scandal erupts in 1955,
when a batch of the polio vaccine manufactured by cut laboratories,
actually infected hundreds of school children with the live polio vaccine
instead of the safe version.
This incident brought attention to the fact that the federal governments
actually had little oversight of vaccine production and sought to rectify this
immediately giving food and drug administration,
the power to regulate vaccine formulas for quality and safety,
a practice that continues to this day and gives the American consumer trust that
the vaccines they are being given us safe.
It didn't take long before the polio vaccine was being produced in large
quantities. And the safety of the product was never questioned again,
the March of dimes and the United States government jointly promoted the vaccine
nation campaign and cases of polio began to drop precipitously. In 1952,
there were 58,000 cases in the United States. In 1957,
there were 5,600 by 1961.
The us only recorded 161 cases that same year AB Sabins
live virus, vaccine was ready to use. It was an oral vaccine as opposed to SOS,
which was an injection. It was cheaper than Sox as well.
Sabins vaccine eventually replaced Sox as the most commonly administered vaccine
worldwide,
but both doctors were hailed as heroes and they both received the presidential
medal of freedom. America's highest civilian decoration. Most amazingly of all,
perhaps is that no one,
not so SA or O'Connor or anyone else made any attempt to patent their vaccine,
which would've been worth billions of dollars to the patent holder.
All of them said that this was for the public benefit and that they shouldn't
therefore profit off of it.
This allowed the vaccine to quickly make its way around the world.
After 15 years, America wasn't afraid of polio anymore.
The disease had been or conquered and most of America had moved on.
But for the hundreds of thousands of people who had survived polio and been
partially or totally disabled as a result, the vaccine did nothing to help them.
After months or years spent in the hospital, they came home to discover.
They now lived in a world that was seemingly designed to make their life more
difficult in the fifties and sixties. There were few,
if any protections for disabled people enshrined into law schools,
businesses and other public places were almost never wheelchair accessible and
few able bodied. People wanted to bother with them.
Often they ended up shipped off to special schools for crippled children,
where they could be hidden out of sight. And out of mind,
as a new generation of children affected by polio grew to adulthood,
they began to become more politically active.
They were one of the largest disability groups in the country,
and they were in the forefront of the disability rights movement that fought as
part of the widest civil rights movement for equal access and equal treatment in
society.
This culminated in the passing of the Americans with disabilities act in 1990,
mandating public accommodations for people with disabilities, wherever possible.
Although there are relatively few polio survivors still alive today,
all the progress that has been made in the rights of the disabled couldn't have
been accomplished without their leadership
In the United States. And most of the countries of Europe,
the number of cases of polio dwindled down to zero throughout the 1970s and
eighties,
the vaccination programs in these countries were so successful in stamping out
the disease that the w H O began to believe that the complete eradication of Leo
was not only possible,
but something that they could accomplish after small parks was declared
eradicated in 1980,
the w H O began to turn their attention more seriously to taking down polio by
1988,
there were an estimated 350,000 cases of paralytic polio worldwide,
mostly occurring in poor countries with little access to modern medicine and
unbel at sanitation facilities.
The w H O announced a partnership with UNICEF and rotary international to launch
the global polio eradication initiative with the goal of eradicating polio
worldwide by the year 2000,
the G E I M to vaccinate every person in countries where polio is still
endemic.
The initiative failed to completely eradicate the disease by the year 2000,
but they had made terrific progress,
575 million children were vaccinated through the campaign,
almost a 10th of the world's population from 350,000 estimated cases in
1988, the w H O recorded less than a thousand in the year,
2005 years later with increased funding from the bill of Melinda gates
foundation, polio was considered endemic in only four countries, India,
Pakistan, Afghanistan,
and Nigeria sweeping the disease out of these final places of refuge ran
into unexpected challenges in adequate healthcare infrastructure poses,
an obstacle in adding everyone vaccinated.
And that's assuming that the people in charge of a particular area even want the
vaccination program to go ahead.
There have been entire sections of countries controlled by forces in opposition
to it such as Boca Haram in Nigeria and the Taliban in Afghanistan.
They view its as undue Western influence on their territory and rumors spread
that the vaccines contain con contraceptives to keep women from becoming
pregnant,
although they will be damned by Allah because the vaccine contains products
derived from pork. Things got even worse in 2011,
when it came out that the CIA had used fake hepatitis B immunizations in
Pakistan to get DNA samples from the occupants of a compound in an attempt to
verify the presence of Osama bin Laden.
There still eradication efforts proceeded as best they could with more success.
Polio was eradicated in India as of 2014. And after some false starts,
all of Africa,
including Nigeria was declared polio free in 2020 only Afghanistan and
Pakistan still have wild polio virus circulating about 125 cases
have been reported in the two countries. So far this year,
much of the polio eradication resources have been redirected this year to combat
the COVID 19 pandemic.
And the w H O is concerned that a resurgence in polio cases is coming,
but even so health officials feel they are only a has rep away from
finishing the polio virus off forever.
The effects of polio on the way Western world can still be seen today.
Special wards in hospitals designed to treat polio patients developed into the
intensive care units that are a standard feature in hospitals today.
Advancements in physical rehabilitation originally used on polio.
Patients used today for all manner of physical ailments.
The concept of crowdfunding collecting small donations from many people as
opposed to large donations from a few wealthy people was first established as
viable through the work of the March of dimes. Today,
crowdfunding is a cornerstone of all major non-profit fundraising and has
expanded into the areas of political campaigning and in private fundraising
efforts, such as GoFundMe campaigns. Finally,
the widespread implementation of the polio vaccine laid the for government
regulation and control of the vaccine industry and mandatory vaccinations for
public school.
Children persist to this day leading to a direct reduction in communicable
diseases worldwide. As the world today is dealing with the COVID 19 pandemic.
We can look back hearteningly on the successful fight against diseases like
polio and realize that as long as we are willing to put forth the same effort,
we can beat this disease as effectively as we did the polio virus.
So I really hope you found that video. Interesting. If you did,
please do hit that thumbs up bottom below.
Also please do support this drug by supporting our fantastic sponsor curiosity
stream link below. And thank you for watching.